update clustered indexes docs (#5129)
pingcap/docs: clustered-indexes.md

---
title: Clustered Indexes

> summary: Learn the concept, user scenario, usages, limitations, and compatibility of clustered indexes.

Author: ```suggestion
summary: Learn the concept, user scenarios, usages, limitations, and compatibility of clustered indexes.
```

---

# Clustered Indexes

TiDB supports the clustered index feature since v5.0. This feature controls how data is stored in tables containing primary keys. It provides TiDB the ability to organize tables in a way that can improve the performance of certain queries.

The term _clustered_ in this context refers to the _organization of how data is stored_ and not _a group of database servers working together_. Some database management systems refer to clustered indexes as _index-organized tables_ (IOT).

Currently, tables containing primary keys in TiDB are divided into the following two categories:

> - `NONCLUSTERD`: The primary key of the table is non-clustered index. In tables with non-clustered indexes, the keys for row data are consist of internal `_tidb_rowid` implicitly assigned by TiDB. Because primary keys are essentially unique indexes, tables with non-clustered indexes need at least two key-value pairs to store a row, which are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `NONCLUSTERD`: The primary key of the table is non-clustered index. In tables with non-clustered indexes, the keys for row data consist of internal `_tidb_rowid` implicitly assigned by TiDB. Because primary keys are essentially unique indexes, tables with non-clustered indexes need at least two key-value pairs to store a row, which are:
```

> - `NONCLUSTERD`: The primary key of the table is non-clustered index. In tables with non-clustered indexes, the keys for row data are consists of internal `_tidb_rowid` implicitly assigned by TiDB. Because primary keys are essentially unique indexes, tables with non-clustered indexes need at least two key-value pairs to store a row, which are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `NONCLUSTERD`: The primary key of the table is non-clustered index. In tables with non-clustered indexes, the keys for row data are consist of internal `_tidb_rowid` implicitly assigned by TiDB. Because primary keys are essentially unique indexes, tables with non-clustered indexes need at least two key-value pairs to store a row, which are:
```

Perhaps we should go through Grammarly first?

Author: Updated in https://github.com/pingcap/docs/pull/5129/commits/ba5a45d6351d10dc372f348a63443a6d9cf12d31.

    - `_tidb_rowid` (key) - row data (value)
    - Primary key data (key) - `_tidb_rowid` (value)

> - `CLUSTERED`: The primary key of the table is clustered index. In tables with clustered indexes, the keys for row data are consist of primary keys consists of primary key data given by the user. There is no need to simulate unique indexes, so tables with clustered indexes need only one key-value pair to store a row, which is:

Author: ```suggestion
- `CLUSTERED`: The primary key of the table is clustered index. In tables with clustered indexes, the keys for row data consist of primary key data given by the user. There is no need to simulate unique indexes, so tables with clustered indexes need only one key-value pair to store a row, which is:
```

On the other hand, tables with clustered indexes have certain disadvantages. See the following:

- There might be write hotspot issues when inserting a large number of primary keys with close values.
- The table itself takes up more storage space if the data type of the primary key is larger than 64 bits, especially when there are multiple secondary indexes.

## Usages

## Create a table with clustered indexes

Since TiDB v5.0, you can add non-reserved keywords `CLUSTERED` or `NONCLUSTERED` after `PRIMARY KEY` in a `CREATE TABLE` statement to specify whether the table's primary key is a clustered index. For example:

```sql
CREATE TABLE t (a BIGINT PRIMARY KEY CLUSTERED, b VARCHAR(255));
CREATE TABLE t (a BIGINT PRIMARY KEY NONCLUSTERED, b VARCHAR(255));
CREATE TABLE t (a BIGINT KEY CLUSTERED, b VARCHAR(255));
CREATE TABLE t (a BIGINT KEY NONCLUSTERED, b VARCHAR(255));
CREATE TABLE t (a BIGINT, b VARCHAR(255), PRIMARY KEY(a, b) CLUSTERED);
CREATE TABLE t (a BIGINT, b VARCHAR(255), PRIMARY KEY(a, b) NONCLUSTERED);
```

Note that keywords `KEY` and `PRIMARY KEY` have the same meaning in the column definition.

> You can also use [supported comment syntax](/comment-syntax.md) in TiDB to specify the type of the primary key. For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also use the [comment syntax](/comment-syntax.md) in TiDB to specify the type of the primary key. For example:
```

:sweat_smile:

```sql
CREATE TABLE t (a BIGINT PRIMARY KEY /*T![clustered_index] CLUSTERED */, b VARCHAR(255));
CREATE TABLE t (a BIGINT PRIMARY KEY /*T![clustered_index] NONCLUSTERED */, b VARCHAR(255));
CREATE TABLE t (a BIGINT, b VARCHAR(255), PRIMARY KEY(a, b) /*T![clustered_index] CLUSTERED */,);
CREATE TABLE t (a BIGINT, b VARCHAR(255), PRIMARY KEY(a, b) /*T![clustered_index] NONCLUSTERED */);
```

> For statements that do not explicitly specify the keyword `CLUSTERED`/`NONCLUSTERED`, the default behavior is affected by the global variable `@@global.tidb_enable_clustered_index`. Supported values for this variable are as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For statements that do not explicitly specify the keyword `CLUSTERED`/`NONCLUSTERED`, the default behavior is controlled by the global variable `@@global.tidb_enable_clustered_index`. Supported values for this variable are as follows:
```

> - `OFF` indicates that primary keys are created as non-clustered indexes by default.

Author: ```suggestion
    - `OFF` indicates that primary keys are created as non-clustered indexes by default.
```

> - `OFF` indicates that primary keys are created as non-clustered indexes by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - `OFF` indicates that primary keys are created as non-clustered indexes by default.
```

    - `ON` indicates that primary keys are created as clustered indexes by default.

>     - `INT_ONLY` indicates that the behavior is controlled by the configuration item `alter-primary-key`. If `alter-primary-key` is set to `true`, primary keys are created as non-clustered indexes by default. If it is set to `false`, single integer primary keys are created as clustered indexes and others are created as non-clustered indexes.

Reviewer 2: If it is set to `false`, only the primary keys consist of an integer column are created as clustered indexes

>     - `ON` indicates that primary keys are created as clustered indexes by default.
>     - `INT_ONLY` indicates that the behavior is controlled by the configuration item `alter-primary-key`. If `alter-primary-key` is set to `true`, primary keys are created as non-clustered indexes by default. If it is set to `false`, single integer primary keys are created as clustered indexes and others are created as non-clustered indexes.

Author: ```suggestion
    - `ON` indicates that primary keys are created as clustered indexes by default.
    - `INT_ONLY` indicates that the behavior is controlled by the configuration item `alter-primary-key`. If `alter-primary-key` is set to `true`, primary keys are created as non-clustered indexes by default. If it is set to `false`, only the primary keys consist of an integer column are created as clustered indexes.
```

+-------+------------+----------+--------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+----------+--------+------+------------+---------+---------------+---------+------------+-----------+
| t     |          0 | PRIMARY  |            1 | a           | A         |           0 |     NULL | NULL   |      | BTREE      |         |               | YES     | NULL       | YES       |
+-------+------------+----------+--------------+-------------+-----------+-------------+----------+--------+------+------------+---------+---------------+---------+------------+-----------+
1 row in set (0.01 sec)
```

You can also query the column `TIDB_PK_TYPE` in the system table `information_schema.tables` to see whether the result is `CLUSTERED` or `NONCLUSTERED`. For example:

```sql
mysql> SELECT TIDB_PK_TYPE FROM information_schema.tables WHERE table_schema = 'test' AND table_name = 't';
+--------------+
| TIDB_PK_TYPE |
+--------------+
| CLUSTERED    |
+--------------+
1 row in set (0.03 sec)
```

## Limitations

Currently, there are two types of limitations for the clustered indexes feature. See the following:

- Situations that are not supported and not in the support plan:

>     - It is not supported using the clustered indexes feature together with TiDB Binlog. After TiDB Binlog is started, TiDB does not allow to create a single integer primary key as a clustered index. TiDB Binlog does not replicate data changes of existing tables with clustered indexes to the downstream. If you need to replicate tables with clustered indexes, use [TiCDC](/ticdc/ticdc-overview.md) instead.

Reviewer 2: 是的。Binlog 开启时，TiDB 不允许创建**非**单个整数列作为主键的聚簇索引。

如果觉得绕的话可以改成 “TiDB 只允许创建单个整数列作为主键的聚簇索引”

>     - It is not supported using the clustered indexes feature together with TiDB Binlog. After TiDB Binlog is started, TiDB does not allow to create a single integer primary key as a clustered index. TiDB Binlog does not replicate data changes of existing tables with clustered indexes to the downstream. If you need to replicate tables with clustered indexes, use [TiCDC](/ticdc/ticdc-overview.md) instead.

Author: ```suggestion
    - Using the clustered index feature together with TiDB Binlog is not supported. After TiDB Binlog is enabled, TiDB only allows creating a single integer primary key as a clustered index. TiDB Binlog does not replicate data changes of existing tables with clustered indexes to the downstream. If you need to replicate tables with clustered indexes, use [TiCDC](/ticdc/ticdc-overview.md) instead.
```

    - It is not supported to use clustered indexes together with the attribute [`SHARD_ROW_ID_BITS`](/shard-row-id-bits.md). Also, the attribute [`PRE_SPLIT_REGIONS`](/sql-statements/sql-statement-split-region.md#pre_split_regions) does not take effect on tables with clustered indexes.
    - It is not supported to degrade tables with clustered indexes. If you need to do so, use logical backup tools to migrate data instead.
- Situations that are not supported yet but in the support plan:
    - It is not supported to add, drop, and alter clustered indexes using `ALTER TABLE` statements.

> After TiDB Binlog is enabled, if you create a single integer primary key as a clustered index, TiDB returns the following error:

Reviewer 2: 的确是 "创建非单个整数列"... 

主键分两种，一种主键只包含单个整数列，另一种主键由其他类型的列或联合几个列构成，也就是“非单个整数主键列”。

> After TiDB Binlog is enabled, if you create a single integer primary key as a clustered index, TiDB returns the following error:

Author: ```suggestion
After TiDB Binlog is enabled, if the primary key you create as a clustered index is not a single integer primary key, TiDB returns the following error:
```

```sql
mysql> CREATE TABLE t (a VARCHAR(255) PRIMARY KEY CLUSTERED);
ERROR 8200 (HY000): Cannot create clustered index table when the binlog is ON
```

If you use clustered indexes together with the attribute `SHARD_ROW_ID_BITS`, TiDB reports the following error:

```sql
mysql> CREATE TABLE t (a VARCHAR(255) PRIMARY KEY CLUSTERED) SHARD_ROW_ID_BITS = 3;
ERROR 8200 (HY000): Unsupported shard_row_id_bits for table with primary key as row id
```

## Compatibility

> ### Compatibility with higher and lower TiDB versions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Compatibility with earlier and later TiDB versions
```

TiDB supports upgrading tables with clustered indexes but not degrading them, meaning that data in tables with clustered indexes is available on a higher TiDB version, but not on a lower one.

The clustered indexes feature is partially supported in TiDB v3.0 and v4.0. It is enabled by default when the following requirements are fully met:

- The table contains a `PRIMARY KEY`.
- The `PRIMARY KEY` consists of only one column.
- The `PRIMARY KEY` is an `INTEGER`.

> However, since v5.0, TiDB creates all types of primary keys as non-clustered indexes by default. Because this behavior change may cause TiDB in the default configuration to perform worse in some scenarios, you can consider explicitly specifying clustered indexes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, since v5.0, TiDB creates all types of primary keys as non-clustered indexes by default. If this behavior change might cause TiDB in the default configuration to perform worse in some scenarios, you can consider explicitly specifying using clustered indexes.
```

Author: ```suggestion
However, since v5.0, TiDB creates all types of primary keys as non-clustered indexes by default. This behavior change might cause TiDB in the default configuration to perform worse in some scenarios. You can consider explicitly specifying a primary key as a clustered index.
```

### Compatibility with MySQL

> TiDB specific comment syntax supports wrapping the keywords `CLUSTERED` and `NONCLUSTERED` in a comment. The result of `SHOW CREATE TABLE` also contains TiDB specific SQL comments. MySQL databases and TiDB databases of a lower version can identify and execute DDL statements with these comments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TiDB-specific comment syntax supports wrapping the keywords `CLUSTERED` and `NONCLUSTERED` in a comment. The result of `SHOW CREATE TABLE` also contains TiDB-specific SQL comments. MySQL databases and TiDB databases of an earlier version can identify and execute DDL statements with these comments.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TiDB specific comment syntax supports wrapping the keywords `CLUSTERED` and `NONCLUSTERED` in a comment. The result of `SHOW CREATE TABLE` also contains TiDB specific SQL comments. MySQL databases and TiDB databases of a lower version will ignore these comments.
```

Author: The word "ignore" seems ambiguous here. Does it mean MySQL databases and TiDB databases won't report errors when processing these comments? Or these comments are not effective in MySQL databases and TiDB databases, thus they are ignored? @tangenta

Reviewer 2: These comments are invisible to MySQL and earlier versions of TiDB.
:heavy_check_mark: won't report errors
:heavy_check_mark: are not effective

### Compatibility with TiDB ecosystem tools

> The clustered indexes feature is only compatible with the following ecosystem tools in v5.0 and later versions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The clustered index feature is only compatible with the following ecosystem tools in v5.0 and later versions:
```

> - Backup and recovery tools: BR, Dumpling, and TiDB Lightning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Backup and restore tools: BR, Dumpling, and TiDB Lightning.
```

- Data migration and replication tools: DM and TiCDC.

> However, you cannot convert a table with non-clustered indexes to a table with clustered indexes by using the v5.0 BR to backup and recover tables, and vice versa.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, you cannot convert a table with non-clustered indexes to a table with clustered indexes by backing up and restoring the table using the v5.0 BR tool, and vice versa.
```

Reviewer 2: or vice versa?

### Compatibility with other TiDB features

> For a table with a combined primary key or a single non-integer primary key, if you change the primary key from a non-clustered index to a clustered index, the keys of its row data change as well. Therefore, `SPLIT TABLE BY/BETWEEN` statements that are executable on TiDB v5.0 and lower versions, are no longer workable in v5.0 and higher versions of TiDB. If you want to split a table with clustered indexes using `SPLIT TABLE BY/BETWEEN`, you need to provide the value of the primary key column, instead of specifying an integer value. See the following example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a table with a combined primary key or a single non-integer primary key, if you change the primary key from a non-clustered index to a clustered index, the keys of its row data change as well. Therefore, `SPLIT TABLE BY/BETWEEN` statements that are executable in TiDB v5.0 and earlier versions are no longer workable in v5.0 and later versions of TiDB. If you want to split a table with clustered indexes using `SPLIT TABLE BY/BETWEEN`, you need to provide the value of the primary key column, instead of specifying an integer value. See the following example:
```

Reviewer 2: `SPLIT TABLE BY/BETWEEN` statements that are executable in **TiDB v5.0 and earlier versions** are no longer workable in v5.0 and later versions of TiDB.

Please notice that it does not include v5.0 itself.

`SPLIT TABLE BY/BETWEEN` statements that are executable in **TiDB versions earlier than v5.0** are no longer work in v5.0 and later versions of TiDB.

Author: ```suggestion
For a table with a combined primary key or a single non-integer primary key, if you change the primary key from a non-clustered index to a clustered index, the keys of its row data change as well. Therefore, `SPLIT TABLE BY/BETWEEN` statements that are executable in TiDB versions earlier than v5.0 are no longer workable in v5.0 and later versions of TiDB. If you want to split a table with clustered indexes using `SPLIT TABLE BY/BETWEEN`, you need to provide the value of the primary key column, instead of specifying an integer value. See the following example:
```

```sql
mysql> create table t (a int, b varchar(255), primary key(a, b) clustered);
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.01 sec)
mysql> split table t between (0) and (1000000) regions 5;
ERROR 1105 (HY000): Split table region lower value count should be 2
mysql> split table t by (0), (50000), (100000);
ERROR 1136 (21S01): Column count doesn't match value count at row 0
mysql> split table t between (0, 'aaa') and (1000000, 'zzz') regions 5;
+--------------------+----------------------+
| TOTAL_SPLIT_REGION | SCATTER_FINISH_RATIO |
+--------------------+----------------------+
|                  4 |                    1 |
+--------------------+----------------------+
1 row in set (0.00 sec)
mysql> split table t by (0, ''), (50000, ''), (100000, '');
+--------------------+----------------------+
| TOTAL_SPLIT_REGION | SCATTER_FINISH_RATIO |
+--------------------+----------------------+
|                  3 |                    1 |
+--------------------+----------------------+
1 row in set (0.01 sec)
```

> The attribute [`AUTO_RANDOM`](/auto-random.md) can only be used in tables with clustered indexes. Otherwise, TiDB returns the following error:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The attribute [`AUTO_RANDOM`](/auto-random.md) can only be used on clustered indexes. Otherwise, TiDB returns the following error:
```

- The `PRIMARY KEY` consists of only one column.
- The `PRIMARY KEY` is an `INTEGER`.

> Since TiDB v5.0, the clustered index feature is fully supported for all types of primary keys, but the default behavior is consistent with TiDB v3.0 and v4.0. To change the default behavior, you can configure the system variable `@@tidb_enable_clustered_index` to `ON` or `OFF`. For more details, see [Create a table with clustered indexes](#create-a-table-with-clustered-indexes) .

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since TiDB v5.0, the clustered index feature is fully supported for all types of primary keys, but the default behavior is consistent with TiDB v3.0 and v4.0. To change the default behavior, you can configure the system variable `@@tidb_enable_clustered_index` to `ON` or `OFF`. For more details, see [Create a table with clustered indexes](#create-a-table-with-clustered-indexes).
```
